Many systems preload every document that might be relevant before the Agent starts.
That can be fast when the corpus is small and stable, but it also spends the attention budget before the Agent knows which detail matters.
Just-in-time retrieval uses lightweight references instead: file paths, stored queries, links, identifiers, folder names, and timestamps.
The Agent keeps the map in context, then opens the specific source when a decision requires it.
This creates progressive disclosure.
A filename suggests purpose.
A directory reveals structure.
A file size suggests complexity.
One search result narrows the next query.
The Agent assembles understanding layer by layer while keeping only the active subset in working context.
Claude Code illustrates the pattern.
Stable project instructions can be loaded up front, while file search, grep, head, and tail let the Agent inspect targeted parts of a large repository.
It does not need every file body in context at once.
The trade-off is real.
Runtime exploration is slower than preloading, and poor navigation can waste tokens on dead ends.
The Agent needs good search tools, informative names, and heuristics for when to stop exploring and act.
Use a hybrid strategy.
Preload stable rules, the current outcome, and the small facts that almost every step needs.
Keep changing, detailed, or rarely used material behind retrieval handles.
The right boundary depends on the task and the cost of a missed detail.
First, keep lightweight references instead of every source body.
Second, let the AI Agent discover detail progressively when it becomes relevant.
Third, balance retrieval focus against the extra time and navigation cost.